[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I decided that I wanted a pet at home. Now, dogs are a cliché, cats
[Amit Varma]: are selfish, snakes can kill you. So I thought, why not buy a horse? I googled for horse trading
[Amit Varma]: and I found the number of a firm called Horse Trading Enterprises. I called the number and
[Amit Varma]: told the guy on the phone that I wanted to buy a horse. He said, no problem, I will bring
[Amit Varma]: some horses to your apartment and you can choose one. I gave him my address and he said
[Amit Varma]: he would be there by 4pm. At 4pm, my doorbell rang. I ran over to the door. I really wanted
[Amit Varma]: a horse in my apartment. I had decided that I would buy a brown horse and I would name
[Amit Varma]: it Black Beauty, just to confuse everyone. Anyway, I opened the door and there stood
[Amit Varma]: a guy wearing a t-shirt that said Horse Trading Enterprises.
[Amit Varma]: Sir, you want to buy horses? He asked me. Yes, yes, I said. Show me horses. Do you have
[Amit Varma]: any brown horses? He smiled. We only have brown horses, he said to me and gestured behind
[Amit Varma]: him. Four men in kurta-pajama stepped forward from the shadows.
[Amit Varma]: Huh? I said. What is this? These are not horses. The guy said, these are our horses. They are
[Amit Varma]: all independent MLAs and they are for sale. But I don't want to buy bloody MLAs, I said.
[Amit Varma]: I want to buy horses. The MLAs looked at each other and sniggered. The salesman glared at
[Amit Varma]: me and said, WTF dude, don't you know what horse trading is?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Baruma. Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My subject
[Amit Varma]: today is the anti-defection law of 1985 and my guest is Barun Mitra, an activist and commentator
[Amit Varma]: based in Delhi. Barun, welcome to the show and tell me a little bit about the intent
[Guest]: behind the anti-defection law. The anti-defection law had been debated for
[Guest]: 10 years prior to that. And, you know, in the 60s, late 60s and throughout the 70s,
[Guest]: there was this discussion about political parties and legislators, individual MPs, MLAs
[Guest]: changing sides, horse trading. There was a famous term coined, Iyeram Gayaram, based
[Guest]: on two person in Haryana, that they could change parties morning and evening. So, this
[Guest]: was an issue and this was seen to be a major problem in political instability, creating
[Guest]: political instability within parties and then at times affecting government. So, this law
[Guest]: was thought of as a way to prevent this kind of petty defection, so-called to change parties
[Guest]: if you are elected on a particular party ticket. If you were independent, it won't apply. But
[Guest]: if one is elected on a party ticket, then it was expected that he would stay with the
[Guest]: party and not be allowed to move. So, the anti-defection law became the first law that
[Guest]: recognized political parties as an entity. The Indian constitution has freedom of association
[Guest]: under which parties and all other associations operate. But it didn't have any provision
[Guest]: for a specific political party. So, the 10th schedule first recognized political parties
[Guest]: and then said that the party leadership can disqualify their MPs or MLAs if they defy
[Guest]: the whip of the party issued on any specific bill on the floor of the house. So, these
[Guest]: two provisions were the critical component. Of course, there was an escape clause too,
[Guest]: which said that if more than one-third people in the party in the legislature wanted to
[Guest]: change side, they could. But individually, they couldn't. So, now, I think it has been
[Guest]: raised to two-thirds, that if two-thirds wanted to change, take the whole party, they could,
[Guest]: but not individually. So, these two provisions and you can see the effects. In the sense,
[Guest]: individual defection from one party to another happens only prior to elections in the hope
[Guest]: of a ticket. It no longer happens as it used to happen in the past. And what you can see
[Guest]: is that while parties continue to split, I mean, we have thousand-odd parties registered
[Guest]: with the Election Commission, they no longer merge. So, we have one-man parties because
[Guest]: every party, every politician who can form or float a party and survive thinks the risks
[Guest]: of joining anyone else limits their political options.
[Amit Varma]: So, essentially, the intention of the law was twofold. One, to avoid detection and therefore
[Amit Varma]: protect parties and organizations, protect apparatus and government. And two, to stop
[Amit Varma]: political corruption because you couldn't buy MPs anymore and money alone would not
[Amit Varma]: sway votes, which would seem to be a noble enough intention. What are the unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences of the anti-defection law?
[Guest]: One which had been debated right through the course of the anti-defection discussion from
[Guest]: the 70s through the 80s as well is what impact it has on freedom of expression. After all,
[Guest]: MPs, legislators are elected to debate and they're expected to vote. If their choices
[Guest]: are limited, then it does curtail freedom of speech and expression of the elected representative.
[Guest]: So, this was a fundamental doubt or a question that hung over this issue for a long time
[Guest]: and it still does. But what was not really recognized or not really seen at that time
[Guest]: was what kind of impact it could have, firstly, on parliament itself, that is, legislator,
[Guest]: parliaments and assemblies. And it's crippled the functioning of parliament and assemblies
[Guest]: in many cases. And the second one, again, which was not really foreseen was a negative
[Guest]: and perverse impact on the culture of political discourse itself, not just within parliament
[Guest]: or assemblies, but in the general society as such. And these two, I think, are really
[Guest]: taking a toll now. And one evidence of that is that there are even MPs who are beginning
[Guest]: to voice their concern about this particular anti-defection law.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we often lament how the quality of political discourse has gone down over the
[Amit Varma]: decades. I mean, if you just see the parliamentary records of the 50s and 60s and the quality
[Amit Varma]: of discourse is incredibly high and people are tackling very nuanced issues. And what
[Amit Varma]: would seem with the anti-defection law is you're forced to take one side of an issue
[Amit Varma]: and therefore it kills nuance, it kills depth of discussion and so on and so forth. Would
[Amit Varma]: you say there are other cultural factors which caused that or the anti-defection law is a
[Amit Varma]: very big part of that?
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the data, you could say that in the 1950s, Indian parliament used
[Guest]: to sit for between 120 to 130 days a year. That's four months. And typically in a five-year
[Guest]: term of the Lok Sabha, they would pass 300-plus bills, registrations. Today, parliament sits
[Guest]: for barely 70 days and the last Lok Sabha, that is the 15th Lok Sabha of Dr Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh and the UPA government, they could pass only 179 bills, with 68 that lapsed because
[Guest]: Lok Sabha got dissolved, which clearly shows that the quantitative part in terms of sittings
[Guest]: have drastically reduced from 120 and 25 to about 70 and the bills have halved. This was
[Guest]: of course not only a consequence of the anti-defection law, there was a slight tendency or slight
[Guest]: trend towards in the same direction through the late 70s and 80s prior to the anti-defection
[Guest]: when we had absolute majorities in parliament and the belief was, and this was the underlying
[Guest]: philosophy that took shape, that democracy is about majority rule. So, if you have the
[Guest]: numbers, what's the point in a debate? And anti-defection law is a culmination of this
[Guest]: philosophy and this to me has contributed greatly, the philosophy as well as this law
[Guest]: that came out of that philosophy contributed greatly to undermining the democratic culture
[Guest]: in our legislative assemblies as well as in the popular and the discussion and discourse
[Guest]: outside.
[Guest]: So, I think the quality of debate, the duration of the sale, the reduction in the timings
[Guest]: of the houses, these are reflections of the deterioration that has been taking place and
[Guest]: what has not been recognized in this majoritarian democratic perspective that has been accepted
[Guest]: widely is without discussion, without debate, without deliberation, what function would
[Guest]: a legislative assembly serve? The whole purpose of a legislative assembly is to provide an
[Guest]: opportunity for elected representatives of the people to consider various proposals to
[Guest]: debate their merits and the pros and the cons, come to certain conclusions and enact. So,
[Guest]: you try to win over the other side, you try to persuade the other side and that effort
[Guest]: depended not just on the fact that you have a majority because the government of the day
[Guest]: is expected to have a majority in any case, but it was part of the culture that you discuss,
[Guest]: you negotiate, you deliberate, so that you have a much wider social political consensus
[Guest]: on a particular issue, so that it goes through without too much of rancor and bad breath.
[Guest]: That sense of political negotiation, bargaining, compromise, getting a sense of coming together
[Guest]: on an issue and taking it forward, that has virtually collapsed. That to me is a huge
[Guest]: tragedy and it has undermined democracy itself because democracy is never about majority
[Guest]: rule.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very insightful point to me because what the anti-defection law therefore seems
[Amit Varma]: to do is it seems to boil all democracy down to the event of the election itself and it
[Amit Varma]: completely makes parliament irrelevant because once you have the election result, you can
[Amit Varma]: feed it into a computer and everyone is supposed to vote along party lines anyway, so debate
[Amit Varma]: and discussion become completely pointless and irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: One interesting thing I noticed, however, is that while it's diminished the quality
[Amit Varma]: of parliamentary discourse, it's not ended the discourse itself. It's just made it far
[Amit Varma]: more strident and almost violent.
[Guest]: And you can actually see that apart from the quantitative aspects in terms of sittings
[Guest]: and the number of bills passed, which have of course come down, disruptions have increased
[Guest]: and disruptions have become a major strategy or a way to display opposition because debates
[Guest]: don't count, the numbers are known and therefore disruption is the only way opponents can think
[Guest]: of capturing the headlines.
[Guest]: Almost political posturing in a sense.
[Guest]: And today it has gone down to the, I mean, last few years that even the government side
[Guest]: with a majority is willing to disrupt if they don't want to pursue a particular debate.
[Guest]: So it's not that the government and the opposition are completely divided in terms of the strategies
[Guest]: to adopt.
[Guest]: They both are adopting very similar strategies to avoid debate, discussion if possible.
[Guest]: And to me, there is the other consequence of this or fallout.
[Guest]: If MPs are not able to debate, discuss, raise questions, how is an elected government or
[Guest]: an executive part of the government, how will it be held accountable?
[Guest]: Because it doesn't matter which party you belong, an MP or an MLA is entitled to ask
[Guest]: any question he or she deems fit to the government of the day.
[Guest]: The first casualty in many of these situations have been the questioner, where the MPs and
[Guest]: the MLAs are supposed to have freedom to ask any question they want and the ministers are
[Guest]: supposed to reply.
[Guest]: But that's gone because now we have disruptions to a large extent.
[Guest]: The second one, so the government's accountability is reduced.
[Guest]: So government gets a blank check more often than not, and which you can see that the number
[Guest]: of bills that get passed without any debate through a voice vote mechanism, that everybody
[Guest]: knows the numbers because calls for a voice vote, IAS have it, IAS will always have it,
[Guest]: so they have it.
[Guest]: And the second part is that since we don't have vote, that is legislators as MPs and
[Guest]: MLAs are not voting on specific bills, how will I or you or any citizen of India be able
[Guest]: to assess their MPs or MLAs?
[Guest]: We don't know on what issue, which MP or my MP or MLA is voting on.
[Guest]: We may not know which way an MP might vote, for instance, on the issue of say, the gays
[Guest]: rights or on any bill or on terrorism laws.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that renders it almost irrelevant what your MP stands for, because ultimately
[Amit Varma]: he has to vote with his party and that's the extent of his influence.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And since the attendance has come down, that a lot of MPs and MLAs don't see any point
[Guest]: in being in the assembly or the legislature to debate, to make their point because they
[Guest]: all know that the outcome is a foregone thing.
[Guest]: And which means that I and you and citizens of India are deprived because they don't have
[Guest]: a very clear way of knowing which way their MPs and the elected representatives are behaving
[Guest]: on specific issues, after all, that's what is important.
[Guest]: For instance, in the UK, almost 80 to 90% of the bills are voted upon.
[Guest]: And people know that which way, and the same is true in the US, that people know which
[Guest]: way a particular legislature has voted on which issue and therefore you can build up
[Guest]: a whole political history of a legislator on a specific issue.
[Guest]: We have no way of doing it anymore because we have simply stopped voting and that's because
[Guest]: there's no point in debate and we know the numbers and therefore there's no point in
[Guest]: holding parliament itself.
[Guest]: That's the logical conclusion.
[Guest]: And in some state assemblies, we have reduced annual number of days that the assembly sits
[Guest]: to less than a month.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to go back to something you said earlier when you said that it's not just the
[Amit Varma]: parliamentary discourse which has diminished because of this, but as a result of political
[Amit Varma]: discourse diminishing in the political space, it's also discourse which has been affected
[Amit Varma]: outside among the common people.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, that seems to be a very logical conclusion.
[Guest]: After all, parliament is the temple of democracy and the way the people behave there obviously
[Guest]: is transmitted to the rest of the society.
[Guest]: And so I won't be surprised if somebody finds that increased disruption inside parliament
[Guest]: is leading to polarization opinion not just within parties, but even across parties outside
[Guest]: parliament that ordinary people are polarized and they take probably a cue from the state
[Guest]: of affairs in parliament and as a state assemblies that debate is pointless, you only need the
[Guest]: numbers and whoever has the might is right.
[Guest]: And the explosion of, what should I say, uncivil discourse, use of unparliamentary language,
[Guest]: not so much inside parliament, but outside parliament has surely multiplied many times.
[Guest]: Social media has really allowed that to happen without the presence of a speaker who has
[Guest]: the power to expunge unparliamentary words.
[Guest]: So we are seeing this polarization, in my view, seems to be an extension of polarization
[Guest]: and breakdown of discourse, is an extension of the disruptions and the conflict inside
[Amit Varma]: parliament.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it would seem to me that the term unparliamentary language itself needs to be
[Amit Varma]: revised.
[Amit Varma]: If someone is saying something in a polite manner, that is perhaps unparliamentary in
[Amit Varma]: the current context.
[Amit Varma]: So this finally leads me to the irony that the anti-defection law will therefore be always
[Amit Varma]: with us because it protects a party establishment and if you can't vote against a party establishment
[Amit Varma]: because of the law, you can't get rid of the law itself.
[Amit Varma]: So it just perpetuates itself.
[Guest]: Yeah, in a way, it might perpetuate itself for a long time.
[Guest]: But I think the extent and the intensity of polarization is leading to a sense of realization
[Guest]: at least among some MPs.
[Guest]: For the first time, I'm seeing MPs, at least a few MPs, publicly voicing their concern
[Guest]: about the various implications of this anti-defection law.
[Guest]: So I can only hope that that sense will grow because 10 years ago, there was no one talking
[Guest]: about the political and social consequences of anti-defection law.
[Guest]: So now that even MPs are beginning to realize that there is a problem, I hope things will
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: But more than the law itself, what needs to change is our understanding of democracy itself.
[Guest]: If we really think democracy is majority rule, then we don't need parliament.
[Guest]: If we believe that elections and majority is one time in four years or five years and
[Guest]: the rest of the time you spend on debate, discussion, deliberations to build a larger
[Guest]: social coalition, the machinery of democracy, then of course, things will change.
[Guest]: And I can just hope for the best.
[Amit Varma]: Varun, thank you so much for coming on the show and talking about the unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: of the anti-defection law.
[Amit Varma]: It was a pleasure having you here.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: It was nice having you.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the end of today's episode.
[Amit Varma]: If you got this far, it means you did not defect from my show to another podcast and
[Amit Varma]: I thank you for it.
[Amit Varma]: I hope you'll join me next week for yet another episode of The Seen and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and the Unseen, Amit Varma will be talking to Alex Tabarrok about
[Amit Varma]: bank control, for more, go to seenunseen.in If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and the
[Unknown]: Unseen, go to seenunseen.in for more details, up and coming independent Indian bans.
[Unknown]: Thank you.